---
title: Radiohead.
description: The best band of all time
date: 2021-05-07
slug: radiohead
image: bruh1.jpg
categories:
    - Music
---

Cover image: Raph_PH, CC BY 2.0 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0, via Wikimedia Commons

## “The process of success is like this slow-drying glue that sets around you, that slows you down and gums you up. And while all that’s happening, your own life’s going on at the side of it, with your own realtionships and your own experiences and that becomes sort of calcified as well” ~Thom Yorke, 2000

While attending Abingdon School, an independent school for boys in Oxfordshire, Guitarist and singer Thom Yorke found bassist Colin Greenwood, guitarist Ed O’brien, drummer Phillip Selway, and multi-instrumentalist Jonny Greenwood, brother of Colin. In the year 1985 they formed a band named “On a Friday”, named after the usual rehearsal day in the school’s music room. The band disliked the school’s strict atmosphere, and found solace, like other artist before them, in music. Specifically in the school’s music department. On the strength of an early demo, On a Friday were offered a record deal by Island Records, which was declined by the band because they were not ready.

## “The others were all brought up to be polite. I wasn’t” ~Thom Yorke

In 1991, On a Friday regrouped, sharing a new house in Oxford. As they continued performing in Oxford, record labels and producers became interested. Chris Hufford, producer of the band Slowdive, and co-owner of Oxford’s Courtyard studios, attended an On a Friday concert. Impressed by the band, he and his partner Bryce Edge produced a demo tape with the band and became their managers. In late 1991, after a chance meeting between Colin and an A&R representative from EMI, On a Friday signed a six-album contract with EMI. At EMI’s request, the band changed their name. They were now called “Radiohead”. The name was taken from the song “Radio Head” by Talking Heads.

Radiohead recorded their debut release, the “Drill EP”, with Hufford and Edge. Released in May 1992, its chart performance was poor. Later, the band enlisted Pixies' producer Sean Slade to produce their debut album. The album was recorded quickly in an Oxford studio in 1992. With the release of the “Creep” single later that year, Radiohead began to receive some attention in the British music press, mostly negative - NME described them as “a lily-livered excuse for a rock band”. Radiohead later released their debut album, “Pablo Honey”, in February 1993. It stalled at number 22 in the UK charts. Some critics compared the band’s early style to Nirvana’s grunge rock style, even dubbing them “Nirvana-lite”. But, in early 1993, Radiohead began to attract listeners elsewhere. “Creep” was played frequently on Israeli radio, and in March, after the song became a hit in Israel, they were invited to Tel Aviv for their first gig overseas. Around the same time, “Creep” started playing in US radio stations and rose to number two on the US modern rock chart. The song entered the low reaches of the top 40 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart.

Radiohead began work on their second album in 1994. Tensions were high, with expectations to match the success of “Creep”. Recording felt unnatural, with the band having over-rehearsed the material. Seeking a change of scenery, they toured the Far East, Australia, and Mexico. Here began Thom Yorke’s trouble handling fame. Yorke became disillusioned with being “At the sharp end of the sexy, sassy, MTV eye-candy lifestyle”. He felt he was helping to sell to the world. The My Iron Lung EP, released 1994, is seemingly about “Creep” - an Iron Lung is a device used to assist breathing. These devices were attached to the person, not allowing him to move or have any freedom, but they kept him alive - a lot like “Creep”, which weighed the band down, forcing them to continue in that song’s style, because it kept them alive financially. My Iron Lung’s sales were better than expected, and suggested the band had found a loyal fanbase.

Having introduced more new songs on tour, Radiohead finished their second album by the end of 1994, and released “The bends” in March 1995. The album was driven by dense riffs and ethereal atmospheres from the band’s three guitarists. The album received stronger reviews for its songwriting and performances.

## “I think artists can influence only through making music that challenges people, excites them and flips them out. Music that repeats what you know in ever-decreasing derivation, that’s unchallenging and unstimulating, deadens our minds, our imagination and our ability to see beyond the hell we find ourselves in.” ~Thom Yorke

The band released their third album, OK Computer, in May 1997. The album found the band experimenting with song structures, as can be seen on “Paranoid Android”, which is a three part song, mixing acoustic guitars, heavily distorted guitar solos, and layered choirs. The album depicts a world fraught with rampant consumerism, social alienation and political malice. The album has even been called a prediction of the mood of 21st-century life. Thom Yorke told Q: “It was like there’s a secret camera in a room and it’s watching the character who walks in - a different character for each song. The camera’s not quite me. It’s neutral, emotionless. But not emotionless at all. In fact, the very opposite.”

## “We did the Glastonbury Festival and this thing in Ireland. Something snapped in me. I just said ‘That’s it. I can’t take it anymore’. And more than a year later, we were still on the road. I haden’t had time to adress things. The lyrics came from something Michael Stipe said to me. I rang him and said, ‘I cannot cope with this’. And he said ‘Pull the shutters down and keep saying ‘I’m not here, this is not happening’” ~Thom Yorke

While touring for OK Computer, Thom Yorke was having a very hard time handling the fame and stress of touring. He began to be driven out of his mind, and even abandoned a stage at Glastonbury Festival in 1997 because of technical problems. In march of 1998 the band came together to record a song for a film, but were unsatisfied with the results and the song went unreleased. Yorke described the period as a “real low point”. He developed depression, and the band became close to splitting up.

In early 1999, Radiohead began work on their next album. Although the success of OK Computer meant there was no longer pressure from their record label, tensions were high. Band members each had different visions for Radiohead’s future, and Yorke suffered from writer’s block, leading him to more abstract, fragmented writing. Radiohead secluded themselves in different studios in Paris, Copenhagen, Gloucester and Oxford. After nearly 18 months of work, Radiohead’s recording sessions completed in April 2000. They released the fruits of those sessions, an album named “Kid A”, in October 2000. Kid A featured a minimalist style with a lot more diverse instrumentation, including a very old instrument called the Ondes Martenot, programmed electronic beats, strings, and jazz horns. It hit number one in many countries, including the US, where it became the first Radiohead album to debut atop the Billboard chart. Radiohead toured the album in a custom-built tent free of advertising. The album received massive praise, winning a Grammy Award, and being ranked one of the best albums of all time by Time and Rolling Stone. The album was even named the best album of the decade by Pitchfork, the Times, and Rolling Stone.

Released in May 2001, Amnesiac was Radiohead’s fith album. It comprised of additional tracks from the Kid A sessions.

Radiohead’s sixth album, Hail to the Thief, released in June 2003. It’s lyrics were influenced by what Yorke called “the general sense of ignorance and intolerance and panic and stupidity” following the election of US president George W. Bush in the year 2000. Hail to the Thief was Radiohead’s final album with EMI. Following Hail to the Thief, Radiohead went on hiatus to spend time with their families and work on solo projects.

Radiohead’s seventh album, In Rainbows, was released through the band’s website in October 2007 as a “pay what you want” download, including $0. The landmark “pay what you want” release, the first for a major band like Radiohead, made headlines worldwide. The release was “Hailed as a revolution in the way major bands sell their music”, and the media’s response was “almost overwhelmingly positive”. Time called it “easily the most important release in the recent history of the music business”. In Rainbows was downloaded an estimated 1.2 million times on the day of release. Colin Greenwood explained the internet release as a way of avoiding the “regulated playlists” and “straitened formats” of radio and TV. In Rainbows incorporates elements of art rock, experimental rock, art pop and electronica. Yorke said that the lyrics are based on “that anonymous fear thing, sitting in traffic, thinking, ‘I’m sure I’m supposed to be doing something else’… it’s similar to OK Computer in a way. It’s much more terrifying”

Their eighth album, The King of Limbs, released on February 18th 2011 as a download from their website. Following the protracted recording and more conventional rock instrumentation of In Rainbows, Radiohead developed The King of Limbs by sampling and looping their recordings with turntables.

Their last album as of the time of writing, A Moon Shaped Pool, was released in May 2016 on Radiohead’s website. It combines electronic elements such as drum machines and synthesizers, acoustic timbres such as guitar and piano, and string and choral arrangements, which feature on the album more heavily than on previous Radiohead albums.

Radiohead are considered by many to be one of the most influential bands of all time. They have made some truly amazing music over the years. And even though they have been through a lot, they powered on through and kept inspiring more and more people to make music. And yes, Thom Yorke has some strong political views that not everyone would agree with, but he writes amazing lyrics and has an astonishing voice.

If you made it this far in and have never listened to a Radiohead album, I strongly encourage you do that. Enjoy!

## “Playing in a country isn’t the same as endorsing the government. Music, art and academia is about crossing borders not building them, about open minds not closed ones, about shared humanity, dialogue and freedom of expression.”
